The Joe Rogan experience.
I don't know too much about the actual,
is there a difference between the way different alcohol affects you? Is,
does the wine alcohol actually affect you by volume by,
by, by the actual percentage of alcohol?
Does it act you differently than beer or differently than whiskey or differently
in tequila? Cause that's what people always say. Oh, if I drink tequila,
I get crazy. Like people always have these stories, but is that true?
If you have, you had a certain percentage of alcohol? I see we equalize.
We equalize the, the alcohol mm-hmm <affirmative>, uh, concentration.
Is it all the same in the, because.
For me,
wine makes me warm and friendly and it makes me
sleepy and it ma I mean, it doesn't make me energetic.
Whiskey makes me crazy. Yeah. Like I think it's a crazy drug.
I think when people drink shots of Jack Daniels, they just want to go, whoa.
They, they, they wanna get CRA. They wanna I'm.
It makes 'em want to do dumb things.
Shots in particular makes people want to do dumb things. Makes people get crazy.
Makes people loud. That makes people Irish. <laugh> right.
Yeah. It's better you saying than me.
Quarter Irish. I can get away with it for a little while. Only a quarter.
That's it? Yeah. Mostly Italian.
Oh, I see. You're at the cusp of these two drinking traditions.
Yes. Yes.
Oh, I see. But Rogan you're fool's Irish. You're fooling us with Rogan though.
YESS an Irish. Cause we would think that you were majority Irish with that.
Yes. Yeah. And I, I could be dark Irish if you looked at me, if you would.
Yeah. I'm well, I'm, you know, I'm um, reserved,
uh, uh, English and Jamaican.
Jamaican's not big drinkers in no, in the same kind of, uh,
uh, the difference actually, fascinatingly of the many weird alcohol facts.
If you look at, uh, young people, it's like, let's look a college age,
young people in America and look at their drinking habits. The, uh,
uh,
black students drink and get drunk markedly less
than white kids. Real differences in drinking behavior by race,
in that, at that age, Asian students don't drink much.
Either drinking is like a, it's like a, it's like a white thing.
It's like a crazy white thing increasingly in, um, or, or problematic drinking.
I always thought that was fascinating. It is fascinating. I don't know.
I don't know. I don't know why that's.
So is it it's revered in our culture more it's uh, yeah, I mean,
getting up is celebrated in white culture. Well.
This, you know, in the alcohol chapter, in my book, the,
I talk of about all the strange things that have happened with drinking patterns
on campus. And I was struck in doing that chapter.
I was interested in the connection between drinking and drunkenness and
sexual assault on campus. Cuz all of those, the overwhelming majority,
if you talk to people who study sexual assault on campus,
they will tell you that you almost never see one of these cases where
both parties aren't drunk. Right. It's um,
which doesn't explain them entirely,
but it's a huge factor in making sense of what happened. But,
and when you dig into that, you see these like really weird patterns. First off,
when I was in college, I did not know. And I went to college in Canada,
not a T totalling population.
I did not know a single person who had ever been Dr. Blackout drunk.
And then now if you talk to a 20 year old college student in,
they will name friends of theirs who get blackout drunk on a weekly basis.
What is the drinking age in Canada? And what was it when you were in college?
When.
I was in college, you was 18.
Yeah. I think that might be a big factor.
I've been talking to friends about this, about Europe,
about how in Europe? Uh, particularly in to Lee and France,
you're you're allowed to drink wine at a very young age. Yeah.
And the taboo aspect of it, the forbidden fruit, all that goes away.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>, it's a, just, it's a,
I don't think young kids should be drinking cuz I think it's terrible for your
brain development.
But I think there's a thing in keeping them from drinking or making it illegal
where it becomes so taboo and so intoxicating that they can't
wait until they can legally do it or they try to get ahold of it before
it's legal and it has this certain excitement to it that just doesn't,
it doesn't have in parts of Europe. Yeah. You've.
Given it up kind of.
So there's all kinds of the things that are new are way less beer and way
more hard liquor. So yeah, hard liquor. When I was in school in Canada,
in the eighties, 95% of what we drank was beer. Right.
It's just not there wasn't any whiskey or even, um,
or tequila or a vodka in our parties. It's just beer, beer.
Kegs, cake parties. Yeah. Really.
Hard to get blackout drunk on beer. I mean blackout to get to blackout.
You gotta be, you gotta get to like, I forgotten what the exact number,
that 10 drinks.
Or something. Well it's.
Point you gotta blow like one eight or something.
I've forgotten what there's a sort of magic number where people is that for.
Everybody. Cuz some people, they just get dribble eyes.
Like there's some dudes they'll have a couple of drinks and they get shark eyes
of those, those dark. Yeah. Like expressionless eyes like, Hey man,
you still here? Yeah. Like they're just wandering around like, like a, like a,
a person with doll eyes. There's no. Well the issue, nothing there.
With the issue with back is just at what point is your hippocampus shut down and
you cease the ability to have the ability to make memories. So that's just,
that's a very narrow, clean explanation of,
so there may be a whole different set of manifestations of drunkenness
that have to do with alcohol's effect on other parts of your brain. Right.
But blackout is just about your hippocampus. Um,
and past a certain blood alcohol concentration,
your hippocampus just goes offline as Essent.
You just pull a plug on HIPC <affirmative> and then so nothing that's coming in
is being stored. Wow. So you can continue to communicate.
I could be blackout drunk right now, but.
Does it vary with people? Does it, I mean the, the, the number, well.
So alcohol, it would, it would vary, um,
depending I think on drinking history and yeah. Um, but I mean, as a,
there is it's, there's a kind of a,
there's a consensus figure where most people, I, I wish I it's in my book.
I wish I could remember. I think it's something like, uh,
point 16 or something like that. If you think of the,
if the Lev the level legal level for drinking for,
for driving is 0.08, I think it's roughly two X that level.
And most people at that level will be at risk will have at least the beginnings
of memory impairment.
So that feeling when you get really drunk at a party and the next morning,
you can only remember little bits and pieces of what that night that's because
your, your hippocampus was at your moment of peak intoxication.
Your hippocampus was starting to shut down and just wasn't taking in new
humidity. It's.
Really interesting too,
because some of our most interesting minds and some of the best communicators
relied on alcohol heavily mm-hmm <affirmative> like, and it made them like,
Hitchins,
it made him a more interesting communicator when he was drunk when he would have
a, a drink, you know, I mean, right.
Like he would be on bill Mar you could tell he was, he was lit. Yeah. And, and,
and he was so eloquent and so articulate,
but that beautiful phrasing. So.
Remember though,
that is an interesting point and a crucial point about blackout,
which is your hippocampus doesn't necessarily control your, uh, your,
how articulate you are, how fluid your speech is.
It's just about memory mm-hmm <affirmative>.
So Hitchens could have been the most articulate person in the world. And just,
and,
but the next morning he would not have remembered a single thing he said on bill
Mar. Mm. I mean, I'm assuming if he was.
I think he was blackout. No, he was a blackout, but.
But you don't know. There's fascinating stories in the literature about, um,
when people were discovering blackout in the fifties and they would,
they would be these stories, like they would, some guy would come in,
he would wake up in Las Vegas and he would say, what am I doing in Las Vegas?
Like, and he would go,
and he would see his clothes hanging in the closet and he would say,
what's going on? And then he would like go down to the desk and say what?
And they'd say, oh, you checked in last night.
And he would look in his wallet and he would see he had a plane ticket from
Cleveland and they would reconstruct. And there's a, in fact,
this very story was told in the, you know,
one of the big medical journals in the fifties, the guy res trucks,
he's a salesman living in like St. Louis who gets really, really drunk.
And then his hippocampus shuts down and he continues to function. So he goes,
gets in his car, drives to the airport, buys a plane ticket, goes to Vegas.
Does he doesn't know what he does in Vegas does whatever he does in Vegas.
And then wakes up like two days later. Oh my gosh.
Hippocampus is suddenly back online. He's like, what am I doing in Vegas?
That is two days.
Two days. God.
So the point is like, the point is that you can, you, you like,
that was my point. I could be blackout right now.
And still communicate. You wouldn't know.
It. I don't, it's not like you can tell,
I can't tell whether you have a headache. Can I? Right. No clue.
So you don't know what's going. I mean,
until we come up with that machine that you were talking about, uh,
you can't tell that my hippocampus isn't working. Ah, except if you answer,
if you ask me the same question, this is how you, the only way you can do it,
you're at a party. You think someone's blackout.
Ask them the same question over and over again and see if they respond.
Like say why you ask me? So literally I would say,
um, wait, did you say you're a,
you're a quarter Irish and then I would just have to wait,
like say five seconds and say, Joe,
did you say you're a quarter Irish and at a certain way,
you're gonna say Malcolm, why is stop it?
If you don't say that you're blackout drunk.
But if you do,
if you could you be blackout drunk and still have like a tiny memory?
No, you just asked me that. Okay.
So, uh, the hippocampus doesn't shut down all at once.
So what it does is it shuts down slowly. So let's imagine where doing shots.
So after, I mean, I'm quite sure your capacity I'm,
I mean, you're like, I'm half your weight, am I? But I didn't know what you are.
You're like 200 pounds. I'm 1 26. Okay. Yeah.
So we're gonna deal with alcohol very differently,
but let's assume we're doing shots of tequila. Uh,
there's a point in where things start to get hazy.
So you might remember that I answered that question or you might not.
And then as we keep drinking in our blood alcohol levels get higher and higher
at a certain point,
your hippocampus will completely like the off switch has been thrown.
So it goes from being sluggish and impaired to just being
down like.
And what brings it back?
Uh, well,
your blood alcohol level has to fall to the point where it can work again.
So you fall asleep and over the course of eight hours of sleep, you know,
your alcohol is processed by your liver, blood, alcohol falls, uh,
hippocampus snaps back into action.
Wow. What a ridiculous drug to be our most socially acceptable drug.
Yeah. To totally. And then the Vegas thing where they give it to you for free,
of course. Yeah. In a place where you can gamble, which is really sneaky. Yeah.
That's one of the weirder laws ever that a person could literally lose their
house while they're black out drunk.
And.